---
title:  "Adapting BC Forest Harvest Limits to the New Era"
subtitle: "How can the forest management strategy of limiting harvest volume adapt to face the perfect storm of game changing phenomena, climate change and information digitization?"
author: "Pablo GM"
avatar: "img/authors/avatar.png"
image: "img/adaptingbcforests2.jpg"
date:   2019-11-22 12:12:12
---

### Introduction
The current challenges of forestry science and industry in British Columbia (BC) are breaking historical records. Two examples of such are (1) the loss of 17 million hectares of pine to the pine beetle outbreak that will shrink the amount of wood available for the next 50 years (Lamers, 2014) and (2) the 2017-2018 wildfire season destroying more than 20 thousand km2 of forest (FLNRORD, 2019d). This has set off the alarms in the forestry community questioning the way we have managed age and diversity of the forests and how our aesthetic and economic needs have led us to reshape fire regimes and insect lifecycle making them increasingly dangerous.
Another concerning challenge was presented in a previous essay, where referring to four dilemmas witnessed during FRST 547 field trips we reflected that making the right choice of species of trees we are planting today is an increasingly complicated decision to make. Both bark beetle and fire crisis have weakened the idea that the amount of wood available for harvest will steadily increase in a forest managed under current practices in BC, and the three challenges together suggest that the future of forestry is composed by pieces of uncertainty that, if not well managed, can have very high costs for the sector. 
But it is not only forestry nor its case in the region of British Columbia that is reaching important levels of uncertainty. The current geological era of Anthropocene (Crutzen, 2006) has driven the planet to its limits in terms of resources available for humanity (Rockstrom et. al. 2009) forcing many ecosystems to be converted into other land uses (Foley et. al., 2005). Simultaneously, we have accelerated many processes of the human world: decisions in stocks markets, in trade and in natural resources exploitation are made in the fraction of a second by automatic bots (Freer, 2014); human information is produced in massive amounts (according to Forbes Magazine (Marr, 2018), 90% of all data existing today was created in the last two years) and, in 2002, humanity entered an era of digital information (Hilbert and Lopez, 2011) with more information being produced and processed digitally that in any other format every day. This avalanche of information being generated, processed and stored in the human world has led to a state where scientists and institutions tend to specialize and not have time nor tools to stay up to date with the advances of branches of science that are out of their common range of work. This specialization can lead to a scenario of disintegrated knowledge that is not being used to its full potential, and in some cases, even make us recycle ideas with new words and framings (Graham and Dayton, 2002).
As if it was not enough, on top of great natural phenomena and the digital transformation formerly described, we have less certainty than ever before of how the future climatic conditions will be like in the near future (Rind, 1999) although the models confirm that we are reaching with accuracy the forecasted levels of global warming that were predicted since the early 1970s (Hausfather et. al, 2019) confirming that it is very probable the climate will destabilize and change more abruptly in the coming decades. 
It is clear that an urging topic to discuss nowadays is how forest management strategies in British Columbia are navigating and could be enhanced for coping with this perfect storm of three concurrent critical components of the Anthropocene: how do we move forward in this era of information saturation and unpredictable climate conditions, knowing that our management decisions can lead us to unpredicted scenarios (like the pine beetle outbreak) that can modify the status quo abruptly from one decade to another?

### Main Discussion
In this essay we want to explore, in the light of adaptation, how the provincial strategy of British Columbia of setting limits to harvest volumes integrates the complexity of the oncoming era of digital data overflow, climate change and management backlashes. Considering that wood harvesting is one of the main activities of forest management in the region, we have focused on the regulations that affect 53 of the 71 million cubic meters harvested in the province of BC (Lawson, 2019). For this, we reviewed the documentation available in the web, mainly in the Forestry section of the Government of British Columbia website, to develop a common structure of the rationale for determining the Allowable Annual Cut (AAC) in a Timber Supply Area (TSA). Subsequently looked at what information is being used currently from the broad range of data that is offered by technologies presented in the course of Forestry in British Columbia. Then, we proceeded to highlight some possible sets of data that are generated already in the region that could potentially improve this process of decision making. Finally, we develop basic recommendations that could be applied to the dominant rationale structure.
For the analysis of the types of information used to integrate the ACC rationale of the TSAs in BC, we consulted the respective justification document for the first 12 TSAs in alphabetical order (25% of the total available) to understand the structure pattern (FLNRORD, 2019 b). The AAC rationale documents are based in a Timber Supply Review (TSR) which is the key instrument to make decisions for determining the AAC.
A TSR is a process can take up to 22 months to be completed, having as a final product a published rationale (FLNRORD, 2016) and passes through 6 stages of construction before being published, exposing it to several perspectives of different stakeholders interested on its content. The first construction stage consists in a data package publication by the Ministry of Forests, that includes the current modelling and measurements that are available for the region using forest inventory data, maps and area limits. On a second stage first nations are consulted (although there is no procedure reported to integrate their participation at this stage) and as a third step a discussion paper is published with the computer modelling which will serve as an input for a fourth stage which consists in a review open to all public and interested parties. The fifth phase consists in determining the AAC which is a decision made by the chief forester and communicated through a rationale statement that will be reviewed again by the public and First Nations in a sixth stage. This process is regulated by the Forest Act and carried out by law at least every 10 years in the TSA, and there is an open commitment to incorporate change that can be done through amendment documents published by the Forest Ministry or by the publication of a new AAC. 
The TSR is a key step in the construction of the AAC rationale and will largely determine to what extent the local communities and forest industries get involved in the calculation of this important number.
The consolidation of the rationale for AAC determination takes the TSR as an input and combines it with other sources of information to decide on the volume and specific constraints of harvest in the TSA. 

#### Information incorporated into the AAC rationale.
There is a standard structure that is given to most rationale documents which was slightly modified with the substitution of Jim Snetsinger by Diane Nicholls in 2016, which explains in part some of the variations found in the comparison (BCGN, 2016). The following are the main categories of data and a description of their main elements: 
1) Description of the TSA and history of the AAC. Contains the size and main topographic elements of the TSA, common climate conditions and a list of the inhabiting and neighboring first nations, local communities and their main economic activities. An overview of previous AAC registered and the reasons for change are enlisted.
2) Information of reference: this is a list of the documents relative to the TSA that were studied and used to augment the reflections that were generated during the review of the TSR.
3) Guiding principles for the AAC. Refers to the importance of uncertainty and how this might affect the suitability of the calculations, the role of first nations in the region and how their rights are being considered and a brief acknowledgement of the importance of climate change and in what way it is incorporated into the models.
4) The development of a base case using a computer model that implies running the Remsoft’s Spatial Woodstock Model a specific case of optimization given certain parameters, being the most common: composition of the forest and expected growth, time of forest reestablishment, silvicultural treatments, constraints of timber required for other uses, socioeconomic objectives and specialized data of fires and devastations. Each of these parameters is justified and broken into subcomponents that are briefly explained with the incorporation of information available in the documentation of reference. 
5) Reasons for decision, AAC determination and implementation practices: the main observations to the model and key hazards to have in mind when operating in the TSA are presented and the AAC for each type of forest is stated.
In case of an extreme catastrophe or event such as the pine beetle infestation or the fires, special documentation is generated as TSA discussion paper to evaluate the urging situation and make decisions for the near future

#### Updates observed in the AAC rationale for the case of Lakes TSA (2011 to 2019).
Although there are 48 TSAs in the province of British Columbia with updated documents explaining the rationale supporting the decision of AACs, we have compared one of the most recently version of these documents, the Lakes TSA AAC rationale, published to be effective in 2019 (FLNRORD, 2019 a) to its predecessor published to be effective in 2011 (FLNRORD, 2009). We assessed how the criteria for determining the AAC have been updated in the last 8 years. We found the region of Lakes to be a good example of a TSA that has been affected by both phenomena of the bark beetle infestation and a devastating fire season in 2018. 
One of the main differences, as expected, is that the amount of information that had to be considered to produce the latest document is almost double in number of sources. The older document cited 36 documents whereas the newer is supported by 70. This case supports the argument that information is increasing with time and it is everyday more difficult to manage it. The documentation referred on the older document is to a great extent technical and regulatory: 9 regarding salvaging and pine beetle management, 8 technical documents, 6 regulations and letters, 3 management plans, 3 on hydrology, 7 others. However, the newer document refers to 12 related to plagues, 11 technical, 9 mapping technologies, 8 hydrological, 8 focusing on species, 6 legal issues, 5 climate change, 2 for first nations and only 1 on fire and 6 others. Although pine beetle continues to be the priority topic, it is important to highlight how a complex perspective arises with new topics being analyzed that were not before in the worldview of forestry: species centered work is gaining track and climate change, first nations and fire are now being taken into account to calculate an AAC. We cannot take this singular case as generalizable, but it helps us to illustrate the trend.
An striking fact is that the example of diversification in the sources of the documentation is not reflected on the way the model was implemented for calculating the base scenario. Although in the newer document three different scenarios instead of one were analyzed independently to inform the decision, in both documents, the same 28 parameters of the previous model with the only addition of alternative rates of harvest (by varying to a higher and lower number the amount of volume harvested in the base case)  and socio-economic information (making a very basic analysis of direct and indirect impact in employment and tax revenue) were used for making the projection and calculation of the AAC (FLNRORD, 2019 c). 
It should be highlighted that the discussion paper presented for public revision included a map of the areas burned during 2018, a brief history of the fire regime since 1930, very basic projections of harvests for the next 200 years, a sensitivity analysis of the model parameters, the age class of the stands and graphics for the behavior of live/dead wood rate in the stands. Yet, all this information was not incorporated into the model and was discussed from a very basic deterministic analysis. 
Being the computer model the key tool for informing the decision taken by the Chief Forester, it is alarming to witness a large gap between the evolution of the information supporting the decision and the stalling of the computational model, suggesting that even being aware of the pressing need of incorporating a higher degree of complexity into the management decisions, this step has not been taken yet in a fundamental process for managing Lakes TSA. We consider that working in a more complex model for setting the value and partition of the AAC is key for improving management.

#### Why is it urgent to bring complexity into the models orienting decisions?
During the mountain pine beetle outbreak scientists found that one of the main causes of the catastrophic dimensions reached by the phenomenon was that human driven fire suppression had led forest to age evenly in great extensions of land, favoring the proliferation of the insects and the intensification of big forest fires (Axelson et. Al, 2009). We can argue that this unfortunate event was caused in part by the imperfection of the models guiding to forestry decisions, as they did not take into consideration parameters outside of the comfort zone of the forestry professionals: most of the logging activities were informed by economic and bio-ecological parameters as demonstrated by the stand value analysis of Pearse (1990). In the second half of the XX century, no scientist was thinking that the age of the stands would have such an alarming consequence in the future. Maybe the first nations knew it, but they were not listened (Brend, 2017). 
Unfortunately, there are at least two (probably more) quantified downsides of a crisis generated by a forest management strategy that is based in an incomplete model: first, the economic costs of the consequences are incredibly high: there is an overwhelming impact in the forestry industry, which was calculated for the pine beetle outbreak to be more than 57 billion dollars (Corbett et. al, 2015). Secondly, the climatic implications can be long-lasting, taking more than 70 years to the forest to recover the carbon stocks that were stored on it before a fire (Smiley, 2016).

#### New information that could be incorporated to the AAC calculations.
Informed by this circumstance, new models are being developed in BC to integrate more complexity to certain components of the forest management process. One example is the development of a growth model for mixed species stands that take into consideration competence for light and resources (Garcia, 2017). Another key parameter that could be included in the models, especially for the case of coastal forest is the effects of windthrow, that has been modelled for old growth boreal forests (Ayomi et. al, 2016). A third factor that can affect forests and is only considered as an implementation consideration in the AAC is the wood decomposition rate and nutrient recirculation that can be analyzed using the work of Blanco et. al. (2018). These are only three of many examples of new components of the landscape that once measured and converted into parameters could help prevent backlashing phenomena. 
Yet, knowing how to model certain behavior does not mean that it will be viable and cost efficient to collect the data. That is the main limitation of the wood decomposition model, for example. But the extraordinary characteristic of two different models that were presented in the course of Forestry in BC is that they already have produced the data to be integrated into the decision-making procedures with minimal effort.
The cheap and worldwide applicable technology of remote sensing is opening the doors to a new era of satellite monitoring. Using free web-downloadable images, we can monitor fire, land use change and probably, in a near future, biodiversity to a detail using certain wavelengths in the electromagnetic spectrum. Advances have been made to identify functional traits (Schweiger et. al., 2018) but a group of experts in remote sensing has estimated that species composition and genetic populations will be a parameter measurable from space in a no far future (Pereira et. al., 2013). 
Another important database is the new plant distributions considering climate change that have been modelled for the region of British Columbia by Hamann and Wang (2006), which could orient us for planting new species in areas where they will develop better and allows us to assess the risk that implies planting trees in an area where an unbeneficial or unknown climate might establish in a near future. 
These datasets are clear low hanging fruits for improving the practice of forestry, and they have been reckoned and put in practice already by the scientists of the Forestry Ministry. The greatest example is the assessment of novel tree planting regimes that is being researched by scientists and with funding of the BC government; by modelling different tree planting schemes and including the one used nowadays, they reached the conclusion that the net primary productivity of the current planting practice will be inferior (in the span of 100 years) to one of planting a diversity of native trees in the harvested stands (Hof et. al. 2017). On top of that, this strategy proved efficient also for increasing resilience to the bark beetle crisis scenario, as diversity would naturally set a natural limit to any plague that specializes in one species (Dymond et. al., 2015).
Looking at the hopeful scenario described by the three scientific advancements above, it is then natural to ask: with all this widespread information available on the form of climate models, satellite imagines and maps of species adequate for the future, why are we still making calculations of the AAC with such a gap of data? 

#### Conclusion
Making our forestry models more complete in terms of information categories incorporated is an important task for dealing with the uncertainty of climate change and complex phenomena. 
As with any mistake, we do not fall again in the same hole. One straightforward reflection is that we should include age diversity of the forest stands in the wider landscape to manage in a way we prevent large fires and mountain pine beetle infestations in a future. Moreover, it would be very useful to include data that could not only help us visualize this threat, but also understand other key components that might affect timber volumes in a future. Three potential sets of data that are nowadays not even consulted by the Timber Supply Review are spectral biodiversity, traditional ecological knowledge of first nations and reforestation strategies considering climate change predictions. Only having this information at hand can be enough to have a discussion on the locations and times of harvest.
Fortunately, at least in paper, wider public can push for this data to be considered and included in the decision making by presenting it to the TSR review.  Scientists and local inhabitants should encourage government to improve the model which they are using to restructure the forest composition through harvest, therefore preventing important crisis that can cause severe damage to socio economic systems. Another special case of improvement would be to Include fire into the management practices which is already being proposed by some particular experiments.
In the era of complexity, we are called to model many ecological, social, economic and structural patterns on top of the tree layer to succeed in our sustainable management of the forests.

### References
Anyomi, K. A., Mitchell, S. J., & Ruel, J. C. (2016). Windthrow modelling in old-growth and multi-layered boreal forests. Ecological modelling, 327, 105-114.
BCGN (2016). BC Gov News: Province’s newest chief forester announced published in 02/26/2016 online, accesed 12/05/2019 in https://news.gov.bc.ca/10378 

Axelson, J. N., Alfaro, R. I., & Hawkes, B. C. (2009). Influence of fire and mountain pine beetle on the dynamics of lodgepole pine stands in British Columbia, Canada. Forest Ecology and Management, 257(9), 1874-1882.

Blanco, J. A., Page‐Dumroese, D. S., Jurgensen, M. F., Curran, M. P., Tirocke, J. M., & Walitalo, J. (2018). Modelling the management of forest ecosystems: Importance of wood decomposition. Natural Resource Modeling, 31(3), e12173.

Brend Y. (2017). CBC News. Forget Smokey the Bear: How First Nation fire wisdom is key to megafire prevention. Retrieved on 12/05/2019 from
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/fire-fighting-first-nations-firekeepers-annie-kruger-penticton-bc-wildfire-mega-fire-1.4205506

Corbett, L. J., Withey, P., Lantz, V. A., & Ochuodho, T. O. (2015). The economic impact of the mountain pine beetle infestation in British Columbia: provincial estimates from a CGE analysis. Forestry: An International Journal of 
Forest Research, 89(1), 100-105.

Crutzen, P. J. (2006). The “anthropocene”. In Earth system science in the anthropocene (pp. 13-18). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

Dymond, C., Spittlehouse, D., Tedder, S., Hopkins, K., McCallion, K., & Sandland, J. (2015). Applying resilience concepts in forest management: a retrospective simulation approach. Forests, 6(12), 4421-4438.

FLNRORD (2009), British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development. Lakes Timber Supply Area: Rationale for Allowable Annual Cut. Reviewed on 12/05/2019 at http://data.nrs.gov.bc.ca/TSR_Historical/TSA/Lakes_14/TSR_2010/AAC_Rationale_2011/14ts11ra.pdf

FLNRORD (2016). Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations Timber Supply Review, Timber Supply Areas. Consulted online on 21/05/2019 in: https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-industry/forestry/stewardship/forest-analysis-inventory/tsr-annual-allowable-cut/tsr_timber_supply_areas.pdf

FLNRORD (2019a), British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development. Lakes Timber Supply Area: Rationale for Allowable Annual Cut. Reviewed on 12/05/2019 at https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-industry/forestry/stewardship/forest-analysis-inventory/tsr-annual-allowable-cut/14tsra_2019.pdf

FLNRORD (2019b), British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development. Allowable Annual Cut – Timber Supply Areas. Reviewed on 12/05/2019 at https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/industry/forestry/managing-our-forest-resources/timber-supply-review-and-allowable-annual-cut/allowable-annual-cut-timber-supply-areas

FLNRORD (2019c), British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development. Lakes Timber Supply Area Discussion Paper. Reviewed on 12/05/2019 at
https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/farming-natural-resources-and-industry/forestry/stewardship/forest-analysis-inventory/tsr-annual-allowable-cut/14ts_tsr_dp_2019.pdf

FLNRORD (2019d), British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource Operations and Rural Development, BC Wildfire Service, n.d., Wildfire Averages, accessed April 17, 2019. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/safety/wildfire-status/about-bcws/wildfire-statistics/wildfire-averages

Foley, J. A., DeFries, R., Asner, G. P., Barford, C., Bonan, G., Carpenter, S. R., … Snyder, P. K. (2005). Global consequences of land use. Science, 309(5734), 570–574. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1111772

Freer, C. E., & Wissner-Gross, A. D. (2014). U.S. Patent No. 8,635,133. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

García, O. (2017). Cohort aggregation modelling for complex forest stands: Spruce–aspen mixtures in British Columbia. Ecological modelling, 343, 109-122.

Graham, M. H., Dayton, P. K. (2002). On the evolution of ecological ideas: Paradigms and scientific progress. Ecology, 83(6), 1481–1489. https://doi.org/10.1890/0012-9658(2002)083[1481:OTEOEI]2.0.CO;2 

Hilbert, M., & López, P. (2011). The World’s Technological Capacity. Science, 332(April), 60–65. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1200970

Hamann, A., & Wang, T. (2006). Potential effects of climate change on ecosystem and tree species distribution in British Columbia. Ecology, 87(11), 2773-2786.

Hausfather Z., Drake H, Abbott T, Scmidt G. (2019) Evaluating the performance of past climate model projections. Geophysical Research Letters. In process of publication.

Hof, A. R., Dymond, C. C., & Mladenoff, D. J. (2017). Climate change mitigation through adaptation: the effectiveness of forest diversification by novel tree planting regimes. Ecosphere, 8(11), e01981.

Lamers, P., Junginger, M., Dymond, C., & Faaij, A. (2014). Damaged forests provide an opportunity to mitigate climate change. GCB Bioenergy, 6(1), 44–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcbb.12055

Lawson, P (2019) Forestry in BC – How is it organized? Accesed 2019/12/02 at http://suewatts.forestry.ubc.ca/forestry-in-bc-how-is-it-organized-paul-lawson-sep-6-2019-4/

Marr, B. (2018, May 21). How Much Data Do We Create Every Day? Forbes Digital Magazine retrieved on Nov 22, 2019 at: https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/05/21/how-much-data-do-we-create-every-day-the-mind-blowing-stats-everyone-should-read/#c54392260ba9

Pearse, P. H. (1990). Introduction to forestry economics. UBC Press.

Pereira, H. M., Ferrier, S., Walters, M., Geller, G. N., Jongman, R. H. G., Scholes, R. J., ... & Coops, N. C. (2013). Essential biodiversity variables. Science, 339(6117), 277-278.

Rind, D. (1999). Complexity and climate. science, 284(5411), 105-107.

Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., F. Stuart Chapin, I., Lambin, E. F., … Foley, J. A. (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Nature, 461(September).

Schweiger, A. K., Cavender-Bares, J., Townsend, P. A., Hobbie, S. E., Madritch, M. D., Wang, R., ... & Gamon, J. A. (2018). Plant spectral diversity integrates functional and phylogenetic components of biodiversity and predicts ecosystem function. Nature ecology & evolution, 2(6), 976. 

Smiley, B. P., Trofymow, J. A., & Niemann, K. O. (2016). Spatially-explicit reconstruction of 100 years of forest land use and disturbance on a coastal British Columbia Douglas-fir-dominated landscape: implications for future watershed-scale carbon stock recovery. Applied Geography, 74, 109-122.


